BUILDING.md, before:

# Building Retro-Go

## Prerequisites
You will need a working installation of [esp-idf](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/release-v4.3/esp32/get-started/index.html#get-started-get-prerequisites). Versions 4.1 to 4.4 are supported.

Version 5.0 is also mostly supported, but you will have to build with `--no-networking` and there are
some performance issues.

_Note: As of retro-go 1.35, I use 4.3.3. Version 4.1.x was used for 1.20 to 1.34 versions._

### ESP-IDF Patches
Patching esp-idf may be required for full functionality. Patches are located in `tools/patches` and can be applied to your global esp-idf installation, they will not break your other projects/devices.
- `sdcard-fix`: This patch is mandatory for the ODROID-GO (and clones).
- `panic-hook`: This is to help users report bugs, see `Capturing crash logs` below for more details. The patch is optional but recommended.


## Obtaining the code

Using git is the preferred method but you can also download a zip from the project's front page and extract it if you want, Retro-Go has no external dependencies.

There are generally two active git branches on retro-go:
- `master` contains the code form the most recent release and is usually tested and known to be working
- `dev` contains code in development that will be merged to master upon the next release and is often untested

`git clone -b <branch> https://github.com/ducalex/retro-go/`


## Build everything and generate .fw:
- Generate a .fw file to be installed with odroid-go-firmware (SD Card):\
    `./rg_tool.py build-fw` or `./rg_tool.py release` (clean build)
- Generate a .img to be flashed with esptool.py (Serial):\
    `./rg_tool.py build-img` or `./rg_tool.py release` (clean build)

For a smaller build you can also specify which apps you want, for example the launcher + DOOM only:
1. `./rg_tool.py build-fw launcher prboom-go`


## Build, flash, and monitor individual apps for faster development:
It would be tedious to build, move to SD, and flash a full .fw all the time during development. Instead you can:
1. Flash: `./rg_tool.py --port=COM3 flash prboom-go`
2. Monitor: `./rg_tool.py --port=COM3 monitor prboom-go`
3. Flash then monitor: `./rg_tool.py --port=COM3 run prboom-go`


## Environment variables
rg_tool.py supports a few environment variables if you want to avoid passing flags all the time:
- `RG_TOOL_TARGET` represents --target
- `RG_TOOL_BAUD` represents --baud
- `RG_TOOL_PORT` represents --port


## Windows
Running `./rg_tool.py ...` on Windows might invoke the wrong Python interpreter (causing the build to fail)
or even do nothing at all. In such cases you should use `python rg_tool.py ...` instead.


## Changing the launcher's images
All images used by the launcher (headers, logos) are located in `launcher/main/images`. If you edit them you must run the `launcher/main/gen_images.py` script to regenerate `images.c`. Magenta (rgb(255, 0, 255) / 0xF81F) is used as the transparency colour.


## Capturing crash logs
When a panic occurs, Retro-Go has the ability to save debugging information to `/sd/crash.log`. This provides users with a simple way of recovering a backtrace (and often more) without having to install drivers and serial console software. A weak hook is installed into esp-idf panic's putchar, allowing us to save each chars in RTC RAM. Then, after the system resets, we can move that data to the sd card. You will find a small esp-idf patch to enable this feature in tools/patches.

To resolve the backtrace you will need the application's elf file. If lost, you can recreate it by building the app again **using the same esp-idf and retro-go versions**. Then you can run `xtensa-esp32-elf-addr2line -ifCe app-name/build/app-name.elf`.


## Porting
I don't want to maintain non-ESP32 ports in this repository but let me know if I can make small changes to make your own port easier! The absolute minimum requirements for Retro-Go are roughly:
- Processor: 200Mhz 32bit little-endian
- Memory: 2MB
- Compiler: C99 (and C++03 for handy-go)

Whilst all applications were heavily modified or even redesigned for our constrained needs, special care is taken to keep
Retro-Go and ESP32-specific code exclusively in their port file (main.c). This makes reusing them in your own codebase very easy!

Commit message:

Added working environment for building in docker

BUILDING.md, after:

# Building Retro-Go

## Prerequisites
You will need a working installation of [esp-idf](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/release-v4.3/esp32/get-started/index.html#get-started-get-prerequisites). Versions 4.1 to 4.4 are supported.

Version 5.0 is also mostly supported, but you will have to build with `--no-networking` and there are
some performance issues.

_Note: As of retro-go 1.35, I use 4.3.3. Version 4.1.x was used for 1.20 to 1.34 versions._

### ESP-IDF Patches
Patching esp-idf may be required for full functionality. Patches are located in `tools/patches` and can be applied to your global esp-idf installation, they will not break your other projects/devices.
- `sdcard-fix`: This patch is mandatory for the ODROID-GO (and clones).
- `panic-hook`: This is to help users report bugs, see `Capturing crash logs` below for more details. The patch is optional but recommended.


## Obtaining the code

Using git is the preferred method but you can also download a zip from the project's front page and extract it if you want, Retro-Go has no external dependencies.

There are generally two active git branches on retro-go:
- `master` contains the code form the most recent release and is usually tested and known to be working
- `dev` contains code in development that will be merged to master upon the next release and is often untested

`git clone -b <branch> https://github.com/ducalex/retro-go/`


## Build everything and generate .fw:
- Generate a .fw file to be installed with odroid-go-firmware (SD Card):\
    `./rg_tool.py build-fw` or `./rg_tool.py release` (clean build)
- Generate a .img to be flashed with esptool.py (Serial):\
    `./rg_tool.py build-img` or `./rg_tool.py release` (clean build)

For a smaller build you can also specify which apps you want, for example the launcher + DOOM only:
1. `./rg_tool.py build-fw launcher prboom-go`


## Build, flash, and monitor individual apps for faster development:
It would be tedious to build, move to SD, and flash a full .fw all the time during development. Instead you can:
1. Flash: `./rg_tool.py --port=COM3 flash prboom-go`
2. Monitor: `./rg_tool.py --port=COM3 monitor prboom-go`
3. Flash then monitor: `./rg_tool.py --port=COM3 run prboom-go`


## Environment variables
rg_tool.py supports a few environment variables if you want to avoid passing flags all the time:
- `RG_TOOL_TARGET` represents --target
- `RG_TOOL_BAUD` represents --baud
- `RG_TOOL_PORT` represents --port


## Windows
Running `./rg_tool.py ...` on Windows might invoke the wrong Python interpreter (causing the build to fail)
or even do nothing at all. In such cases you should use `python rg_tool.py ...` instead.


## Changing the launcher's images
All images used by the launcher (headers, logos) are located in `launcher/main/images`. If you edit them you must run the `launcher/main/gen_images.py` script to regenerate `images.c`. Magenta (rgb(255, 0, 255) / 0xF81F) is used as the transparency colour.


## Capturing crash logs
When a panic occurs, Retro-Go has the ability to save debugging information to `/sd/crash.log`. This provides users with a simple way of recovering a backtrace (and often more) without having to install drivers and serial console software. A weak hook is installed into esp-idf panic's putchar, allowing us to save each chars in RTC RAM. Then, after the system resets, we can move that data to the sd card. You will find a small esp-idf patch to enable this feature in tools/patches.

To resolve the backtrace you will need the application's elf file. If lost, you can recreate it by building the app again **using the same esp-idf and retro-go versions**. Then you can run `xtensa-esp32-elf-addr2line -ifCe app-name/build/app-name.elf`.


## Building with docker with docker-compose
If you don't want to install idf on your computer and prefer to work in an isolated environment you can use docker and docker-compose. In this case you'll just need to have docker and docker compose installed on your computer.

By default the docker-compose.yml is setted on idf v5.0 but you can change it just by editing the docker-compose.yml file.

To prepare the environment you'll have to run `docker-compose build` once. You'll have to run it again if you change the version of idf in docker-compose.yml file. Once done run `docker-compose run retro-go bash` it will open a new command line with all the idf framework setted up.

Note: the docker-compose.yml is setted to work in privileged mode, that means that you'll have access to the /dev/tty* from inside. So you'll be able to use esptool.py to flash your device direclty from inside the docker container.

```sh
docker-compose build
docker-compose run retro-go bash

python rg_tool.py --target=esp32s3-devkit-c --no-networking build-img launcher retro-core
esptool.py --baud 460800 --port /dev/ttyACM0 write_flash --flash_size detect 0x0 retro-go_unknown_esp32s3-devkit-c.img
python rg_tool.py --port=/dev/ttyACM0 monitor

# cleaning
python rg_tool.py clean
rm retro-go_unknown_esp32s3-devkit-c.img
```



## Porting
I don't want to maintain non-ESP32 ports in this repository but let me know if I can make small changes to make your own port easier! The absolute minimum requirements for Retro-Go are roughly:
- Processor: 200Mhz 32bit little-endian
- Memory: 2MB
- Compiler: C99 (and C++03 for handy-go)

Whilst all applications were heavily modified or even redesigned for our constrained needs, special care is taken to keep
Retro-Go and ESP32-specific code exclusively in their port file (main.c). This makes reusing them in your own codebase very easy!
